Editorial review: Add docs for view-transition-name: match-element (#39759)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/view-transition-name/index.md

{{CSSRef}}

> The **`view-transition-name`** [CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) property specifies the [view transition](/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transition_API) group that selected elements will appear in, which enables an element to be animated using a separate view transition to the default (root) transition, or not animated at all.

Author: OK, thanks for the commentary here. I'm pretty sure I've heard other people referring to "groups" or "snapshot groups" to describe the different snapshots, but I've updated the language through to stay away from this terminology as much as possible. Let me know if you still have concerns.

I've also updated the wording to make sure I'm not talking about multiple view transitions.

/* Keyword value */
view-transition-name: none;
view-transition-name: match-element;
```

### Values

- {{cssxref("custom-ident")}}
  - : An identifying name that causes the selected element to participate in a separate snapshot from the root snapshot. The `<custom-ident>` cannot be `auto`, `match-element`, or `none`.
- `match-element`
  - : The selected element is automatically given an unique identifying name based on its identity, which enables it to be animated separately from all other elements on the page. The name is an internal token representing the element, which is not visible to the web document.
- `none`

>   - : The selected element will not participate in a view transition, unless it has a parent element with a `view-transition-name` set, in which case it would be snapshotted as part of that element.

Author: I don't think this is necessary; we say "parent" earlier in the sentence.

## Description

By default, when a view transition is applied to a web app, all changes to the UI that occur during that transition are snapshotted and animated together, which is the default — or `root` — snapshot (see [The view transition pseudo-element tree](/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transition_API/Using#the_view_transition_pseudo-element_tree)). By default, this animation is a smooth cross-fade, which can be seen in action in our [View Transitions SPA demo](https://mdn.github.io/dom-examples/view-transitions/spa/).

If you want certain elements to be animated differently from the `root` snapshot during the view transition, you can do so by giving them a different `view-transition-name`, for example:

```css
figcaption {
  view-transition-name: figure-caption;
}
```

You can then specify what animation you want for the before and after snapshots using the relevant view transition pseudo-elements — {{cssxref("::view-transition-old()")}} and {{cssxref("::view-transition-new()")}}. For example:

```css
::view-transition-old(figure-caption) {
  animation: 0.25s linear both shrink-x;
}

::view-transition-new(figure-caption) {
  animation: 0.25s 0.25s linear both grow-x;
}
```

> If you don't want an element to be snapshotted separately, you can specify a `view-transition-name` value of `none`:

Author: See above

}
```

### Specifying `view-transition-name` values automatically

Sometimes you will want to animate multiple UI elements separately in a view transition. This is often the case when you have a list of elements on a page and want to rearrange them in some way:

```html
<ul>
  <li>Item 1</li>
  <li>Item 2</li>
  <li>Item 3</li>
  <li>Item 4</li>
  ...
</ul>
```

The `view-transition-name` `<custom-ident>` must be unique for each rendered element taking part in the view transition. If two rendered elements have the same `view-transition-name` at the same time, {{domxref("ViewTransition.ready")}} will reject and the transition will be skipped. Giving each one a unique name can be inconvenient, especially as the number of elements gets larger:

```css
li:nth-child(1) { view-transition-name: item1; }
li:nth-child(2) { view-transition-name: item2; }
li:nth-child(3) { view-transition-name: item3; }
li:nth-child(4) { view-transition-name: item4; }
...
```

To get around this problem, you can use the `match-element` value, which causes the browser to give each selected element a unique internal `view-transition-name`:

```css
li {
  view-transition-name: match-element;
}
```

> Because `match-element` assigns automatic `view-transition-name` values based on element identity, it can only be used for single-page view transitions. The auto-generated internal identifiers are not transferrable across different elements or documents.

Author: updated!

/* Keyword value */
view-transition-name: none;
view-transition-name: match-element;
```

### Values

- {{cssxref("custom-ident")}}
  - : An identifying name that causes the selected element to participate in a separate [view transition](/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transition_API) from the root view transition. The `<custom-ident>` cannot be `auto`, `match-element`, or `none`.
- `match-element`
  - : The selected element is automatically given an unique identifying name based on the type of element, which enables it to be transitioned separately from all other elements on the page. The name is an internal token representing the element, which is not visible to the web document.
- `none`
  - : The selected element will not participate in a view transition.

> [!NOTE]

> > The specification also mentions an `auto` keyword value, which isn't yet supported in any browser.

Reviewer: Safari 18.2+ supports `auto`. The property value is being disputed at the CSSWG, though.

Author: I've decided to remove the mention of `auto` for now in that case. I'll revisit it later on, and document it separately.

## Description

By default, when a view transition is applied to a web app, all changes to the UI that occur during that transition are animated as a single group, which is the default — or `root` — group (see [The view transition pseudo-element tree](/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transition_API/Using#the_view_transition_pseudo-element_tree)). By default, this animation is a smooth cross-fade, which can be seen in action in our [View Transitions SPA demo](https://mdn.github.io/dom-examples/view-transitions/spa/).

If you want certain elements to be animated differently from the `root` group during the view transition, you can do so by giving them a different `view-transition-name`, for example:

```css
figcaption {
  view-transition-name: figure-caption;
}
```

You can then specify what animation you want for the before and after snapshots using the relevant view transition pseudo-elements — {{cssxref("::view-transition-old()")}} and {{cssxref("::view-transition-new()")}}. For example:

```css
::view-transition-old(figure-caption) {
  animation: 0.25s linear both shrink-x;
}

::view-transition-new(figure-caption) {
  animation: 0.25s 0.25s linear both grow-x;
}
```

> If you don't want an element to be animated during a view transition, you can specify a `view-transition-name` value of `none`:

Reviewer: I believe this is more correct:

```suggestion
If you don't want an element to be snapshotted separately, you can specify a `view-transition-name` value of `none`:
```

This because the element can still be snapshotted as part of a parent element with a `view-transition-name`

```css
.dont-animate-me {
  view-transition-name: none;
}
```

### Specifying `view-transition-name` values automatically

Sometimes you will want to include multiple UI elements in a view transition, but animate all of them separately. This is often the case for example when you have a list of elements on a page and want to rearrange them in some way:

```html
<ul>
  <li>Item 1</li>
  <li>Item 2</li>
  <li>Item 3</li>
  <li>Item 4</li>
  ...
</ul>
```

The `view-transition-name` `<custom-ident>` must be unique for each rendered element taking part in the view transition. If two rendered elements have the same `view-transition-name` at the same time, {{domxref("ViewTransition.ready")}} will reject and the transition will be skipped. Giving each one a unique name can be inconvenient, especially as the number of elements gets larger:

```css
li:nth-child(1) { view-transition-name: item1; }
li:nth-child(2) { view-transition-name: item2; }
li:nth-child(3) { view-transition-name: item3; }
li:nth-child(4) { view-transition-name: item4; }
...
```

> To get around this problem, you can use the `match-element` value, which causes the browser to give each selected element a unique internal `view-transition-name` based on its type:

Reviewer: What do you mean by “based on its type”?

```css
li {
  view-transition-name: match-element;
}
```

> Because of technical limitations, `match-element` can only be used for single-page view transitions. The auto-generated internal identifiers are not transferrable across different documents.

Reviewer: Suggestion to be more explicit and state the “technical limitations”:

```suggestion
Because `match-element` assigns automatic `view-transition-name` values based on element identity, it can only be used for single-page view transitions. The auto-generated internal identifiers are not transferrable across different elements or documents.
```

## Examples

### Basic `view-transition-name` usage

Our [View Transitions SPA demo](https://mdn.github.io/dom-examples/view-transitions/spa/), is a basic image gallery. See [Basic SPA view transition](/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transition_API/Using#basic_spa_view_transition) for a more detailed explanation of how this demo works.

> Most of the UI changes are animated using the `root` transition snapshot. However, the `<figcaption>` is given a `view-transition-name` of `figure-caption` to allow it to be animated differently from the rest of the page:

Author: It's an actual `view-transition-name` set by the browser, so I think it is OK to have it in code?

```css
main {
  height: calc(100% - 80px);
  display: flex;
  gap: 10px;
  position: relative;
}

ul {
  width: 300px;
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  gap: 10px;
}

article {
  flex: 1;
}

li {
  flex: 1;
}
```

We also define a rule that selects elements with the `active-item` class. When this class is applied to an element, the rule causes it to be positioned exactly over the top of the `<article>` element. This class will be applied to the list items via JavaScript when their links are clicked, which will initiate a view transition.

```css
.active-item {
  position: absolute;
  z-index: 1;
  translate: 310px;
  width: calc(100% - 310px);
  height: 100%;
}
```

By default, all the rendered elements involved in the view transition will be animated together, in one cross-fade. However, in this case, we don't want this — we want to give each list item an individual movement animation. We can achieve this by applying `view-transition-name: match-element` to the list items:

```css
.match-element-applied li {
  view-transition-name: match-element;
}
```

> The `match-element-applied` class is applied to the `<main>` element. You can remove this class by unchecking the checkbox in the bottom-right corner of the UI. This allows you to compare the singular cross-fade animation you get without `view-transition-name: match-element` to the individual movement animations you get when it is applied.

Author: Good call. Added!
